---
layout: post
title:  "L.A.M.A: Coding"
date:   2019-05-30 09:40:18 -0600
categories: SHEDDING
image: images/lamabgg.jpg
author: Mark Goadrich
avatar: images/goadrich.png
authorhome: http://mark.goadrich.com
comments: true
---

Our sixth game for analysis is a new [shedding game](https://www.pagat.com/class/shed.html), 
[L.A.M.A](https://boardgamegeek.com/boardgame/266083/lama) by
[Reiner Knizia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Reiner_Knizia) and 
[AMIGO Games](https://www.amigo.games/).  L.A.M.A. was just nominated for the 
[2019 Spiel Des Jahres](https://www.spiel-des-jahres.com/de/hier-sind-die-nominierten-2019), 
one of the premier board game awards in Germany!
You can find the [official English rules](https://boardgamegeek.com/filepage/180052/lama-official-rules)
over at [BoardGameGeek](https://boardgamegeek.com).

### Rules Overview

In L.A.M.A, players must quickly shed
their hand to the discard pile, but can also bow out and hope they will 
earn less points than other players. 
This is definitely a [matching](https://www.pagat.com/class/match.html) game, 
and twists the basic [stops](https://www.pagat.com/stops/) mechanic of requiring 
card play in ascending order into a cyclic loop.
Here's the introduction from the rulebook:

>The Llama commands it: Get rid of all your negative points! Play your cards or
you will earn negative points. If you can’t play a card, you’ll have to decide:
Do you quit now, or do you draw a card which hopefully you can play later?
Negative points come in the form of tokens, and if you get rid of all your
cards, you can return a token—which may be worth 1 or 10 points. The player
with the fewest points at the end wins the game.

### RECYCLE Coding

To illustrate how we encode the rules computationally, we will
walk through in detail the [RECYCLE](https://cardstock.readthedocs.io/en/latest/recycle/index.html) 
code we wrote for L.A.M.A. 

First, we set up the game by initializing the number of players. This will be from 2 to 6 in our actual
simulations. We put each player on its own team, since there are no teams in L.A.M.A. Finally,
we create the deck of cards, eight each of the seven card types, ONE, TWO, THREE, FOUR, 
FIVE, SIX, and LLAMA.

{% highlight racket %}
(game
 (setup
  (create players 4)
  (create teams (0) (1) (2) (3))
  
  (repeat 8 (create deck (game vloc DISCARD) 
     (deck (NUMBER (ONE, TWO, THREE, FOUR, FIVE, SIX, LLAMA))))))
{% endhighlight %}

Next, we assign a numerical value to the cards using a PointMap. This will be used later to determine if they
are being correctly played in ascending order, as well as for scoring purposes.

{% highlight racket %}
 (do    
     (   
      (put points 'VALUE
           (
            ((NUMBER (ONE)) 1)
            ((NUMBER (TWO)) 2)
            ((NUMBER (THREE)) 3)
            ((NUMBER (FOUR)) 4)
            ((NUMBER (FIVE)) 5)
            ((NUMBER (SIX)) 6)
            ((NUMBER (LLAMA)) 7)))))
{% endhighlight %}

The game will continue in rounds until one player has 40 or more points.

{% highlight racket %}
 (stage player 
        (end 
         (any player 'P
              (>= ('P sto SCORE) 40))) 
{% endhighlight %}

Before each round, the cards are moved from the visible `DISCARD` location to 
the hidden `STOCK` location and then shuffled. Each player is then dealt 6 
cards into their `HAND`. The top card from the stock is turned face-up on the 
`DISCARD` pile to start.

{% highlight racket %}
  (do    
     (            
      (repeat all
              (move (top (game vloc DISCARD))
                    (top (game iloc STOCK))))
      (shuffle (game iloc STOCK))
      (all player 'P
           (repeat 6
                   (move (top (game iloc STOCK))
                         (top ('P iloc HAND)))))
      (move (top (game iloc STOCK))
            (top (game vloc DISCARD)))))
{% endhighlight %}

To keep track of a player's cards, we will have two locations, a `HAND` location and 
a `QUIT` location. Both locations will be invisible to other players.

There are two ways to end a round. Either one player has played their last card, or 
everyone has decided to quit the round. For the first option, this will
be determined when there are no cards in both their `HAND`
and `QUIT` locations. In the second case, all players have cards in their `QUIT` location.

{% highlight racket %}
 (stage player
        (end (or (any player 'P
                      (and (== (size ('P iloc HAND)) 0)
                           (== (size ('P iloc QUIT)) 0)))
                 (all player 'P
                      (!= (size ('P iloc QUIT)) 0))))
{% endhighlight %}

Now for the choices. Before we get there, though, we need to account for 
the situation where players already have cards
in their `QUIT` location. If this is the case, then the only thing they can do is pass.

{% highlight racket %}
(choice
 (
  ((> (size ((current player) iloc QUIT)) 0)
   (turn pass))
{% endhighlight %}

A player has three options for their turn: play a card, draw a card, or quit. First,
a player can move a card from their `HAND` to the `DISCARD` pile 
if the card has the same `'VALUE` as the 
card on top of the `DISCARD` pile. Also, the card can be played if the value is one more
than the top of the `DISCARD` pile. Finally, the special llama cards can be wrapped around,
since they are higher than a 6, and lower than a 1.

{% highlight racket %}
  (do
      (
       (any ((current player) iloc HAND) 'C
            ((or (== (score (top (game vloc DISCARD)) using 'VALUE) 
                    (score 'C using 'VALUE))
                (== (score (top (game vloc DISCARD)) using 'VALUE) 
                    (- (score 'C using 'VALUE) 1))
                (== (score 'C using 'VALUE) 
                    (- (score (top (game vloc DISCARD)) using 'VALUE) 6)))
             
             (move 'C 
                   (top (game vloc DISCARD)))))))
{% endhighlight %}

Second, to draw a card from the `STOCK` into their `HAND`, three conditions must be met.
There must be cards in the `STOCK` to draw, the player must not have any cards in
their `QUIT` location, and there must be at least one other player who has no 
cards in their `QUIT` location.

{% highlight racket %}
  ((and (!= (size (game iloc STOCK)) 0)  
        (== (size ((current player) iloc QUIT)) 0)  
        (any (other player) 'OP  
             (== (size ('OP iloc QUIT)) 0)))
                         
   (move (top (game iloc STOCK))
         (top ((current player) iloc HAND))))
{% endhighlight %}

Finally, a player can decide to quit the round. This is accomplished by moving all
of their cards from their `HAND` location to their `QUIT` location.

{% highlight racket %}
  (repeat all
          (move (top ((current player) iloc HAND))
                (top ((current player) iloc QUIT)))))))
{% endhighlight %}

Once the round is over, it is time to determine player's scores for the round.
First, if a player ended the round by playing the last card from their `HAND` to the
`DISCARD` pile, then they can decrease their score. If they have 10 or more points, they 
can decrease their score by 10. Otherwise, they can decrease their score by 1.

{% highlight racket %}
 (do 
     (
      (all player 'P
           (do
               (
                ((and (== (size ('P iloc HAND)) 0)
                      (== (size ('P iloc QUIT)) 0)
                      (> ('P sto SCORE) 0))
                 (do
                     (
                      (dec ('P sto SCORE) 1)
                      ((>= ('P sto SCORE) 9)
                       (dec ('P sto SCORE) 9)))))
{% endhighlight %}

For all other players, we first put the cards remaining in their `HAND` location into 
their `QUIT` location. Since the actual location no longer matters, this will
make the remaining score calculations simpler.

{% highlight racket %}
(repeat all
        (move (top ('P iloc HAND))
              (top ('P iloc QUIT))))
{% endhighlight %}

Now, we add up the points for a player. We only want to count each card value once, 
so we iterate over the possible values, calling each one `'S`. Then we make a filter
of the player's cards based on this value. When the size of this filter is
greater than 0, we add that value to the player's `SCORE`. While llama cards act like a
7 (and a 0) above for play, they are worth 10 points, thus we must add an additional 3 points to
their score.

{% highlight racket %}
(all (range 1..8) 'S
     (do 
         (
          ((> (size (filter ('P iloc QUIT) 'H (== (score 'H using 'VALUE) 'S))) 0)
           (do
               (
                (inc ('P sto SCORE) 'S)
                ((== 'S 7)
                 (inc ('P sto SCORE) 3))))))))
{% endhighlight %}

To end the round, all of the cards are moved to the `DISCARD` pile, read for the next round.

{% highlight racket %}
                (repeat all
                        (move (top ('P iloc QUIT))
                              (top (game vloc DISCARD))))))))))
{% endhighlight %}

At the end of the game, we determine the winner by whoever has the least points.

{% highlight racket %}
 (scoring min ((current player) sto SCORE)))
{% endhighlight %}
 
### Up Next

So, it looks like in L.A.M.A. the individual rounds will have some tactical play and a 
press-your-luck feel, but the overall scoring system, with its opportunity for large point swings
when returning black tokens, should bring in some strategy and ability for players to catch
up. We'll look at both of these levels in our simulation analysis in the next post, and see if 
we can get a good feel for what makes the game tick. Thanks for reading, stay tuned for more!